Identify avenues to invest the savings in suitable investment vehicle. Compare historical returns generated by different assets, and know what to expect from you .. Find out who and how the regulators govern the financial markets and also understand different types of financial market participants. Understand the need to regulate the markets.
 .. An overview of the financial intermediaries in the Indian stock market and the services they offer. 
 .. Understand the origins of business and the funding environment of business. Learn about the different funding stages and also learn how funding works.
 .. Learn the basics of the IPO market and the process of how to go about investing in IPO’s. This chapter also helps us understand the different IPO Jargons that are commonly used.
 .. We explore the basics of stock trading and understand what makes the stock move on a minute by minute basis. We also explore concept of return calculation. 
 .. An overview of the Indian Stock Market Indices, their construction, and practical uses in trading
 .. Glossary of common stock market terms &amp; associated concepts used in trading. We also explain in detail on how to short a stock.
 .. An introduction to The Trading Terminal, its interface, various functionalities and relevant concepts
 .. The behind the scene operations involved in share buying &amp; selling 
 .. Various corporate actions and the effect they have on the share prices and trading activity. Keys things you need to know before subscribing for a corporate action
 .. An introduction to the various macros economic factors that impact the performance of shares and stock markets. 
 .. Learn about the importance of developing a Point of View on stock markets, its impact, and its relevance to developing a strategy while trading stocks.
 .. The note discovers the various options available to companies to raise funds before and after getting listed in the secondary markets
 .. The 20 Market Depth (level 3 data) Window I’ve driven a car for many years and I’ve even changed my car a few times now. Each time I changed my car, the engine remained more or less the same, but  .. 
